Add article "Customize your performance data with extensibility API" (#3406)
MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer: microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/performance/extension.md

}
```

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Inject your data with `console.timeStamp`

The console.timeStamp API is extended to allow for the creation of custom timing entries in the Performance panel with minimal overhead.

```
console.timeStamp(label: string, start?: string, end?: string, trackName?: string, trackGroup?: string, color?: DevToolsColor);
```

label: The label for the timing entry.
start: The name of a previously recorded timestamp (using console.timeStamp(timeStampName)). If undefined, the current time is used.
end: The name of a previously recorded timestamp. If undefined, the current time is used.
trackName: The name of the custom track.
trackGroup: The name of the track group.
color: The color of the entry.

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## View your data in the timeline

To see your custom data in the timeline, in the Performance panel, turn on settings Capture settings > check_box Extension data.

![The 'Extension data' checkbox in the 'Capture settings' of the Performance panel](todo: extension-data.png)

> Try it on this demo page  https://corgi-collage.vercel.app/ .  Turn on Extension data, start a performance recording, click Add new Corgi on the demo page, then stop the recording. You'll see a custom track in the trace that contains events with custom tooltips and details in the Summary tab.

Author: need demo @captainbrosset

This API offers two approaches to achieve this:

1. **The `console.timeStamp` API (extended for DevTools)**

   This API provides a high-performance method for instrumenting applications and surfacing timing data exclusively to the **Performance** tool in DevTools.  It's designed for minimal runtime overhead, making it suitable for instrumenting hot paths and production builds.  It does not add entries to the browser's internal performance timeline.

1. **The User Timings API (using `performance.mark` and `performance.measure`)**

   This API leverages the existing [User Timings API](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Performance_API/User_timing).  It also adds entries to the browser's internal performance timeline, allowing for further analysis and integration with other performance tools; see [Performance APIs](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Performance_API) at MDN.

> ![An example of how custom tracks look in the Performance tool](./extension-images/example.png)

Author: show localhost instead of github.io, in Address Bar?

  trackGroup?: string;      // Optional: Group for organizing tracks
  properties?: [string, string][]; // Key-value pairs for detailed view
  tooltipText?: string;     // Short description for tooltip
}

interface ExtensionMarkerPayload {
  dataType: "marker";       // Required: Identifies as a marker
  color?: DevToolsColor;    // Defaults to "primary"
  properties?: [string, string][]; // Key-value pairs for detailed view
  tooltipText?: string;     // Short description for tooltip
}
```

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## View your data in the timeline
<!-- https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/performance/extension#view-custom-data -->

To see your custom data in the timeline, in the **Performance** tool, make sure the setting is on: click **Capture settings** (![Capture settings icon](./extension-images/capture-settings-icon.png)), and then select the **Show custom tracks** checkbox:

![The 'Show custom tracks' checkbox in the 'Capture settings' of the Performance tool](./extension-images/custom-tracks-setting.png)

To see the custom perf measures in the demo:

> 1. Open the [Photo Gallery demo page](https://microsoftedge.github.io/Demos/photo-gallery/) in a new window or tab.

Author: I did all of the above, in conjunction with creating PR 65 in Demos repo.

1. Right-click the demo webpage, and then select **Inspect**.

   DevTools opens.

1. In DevTools, select the **Performance** (![Performance icon](./extension-images/performance-icon.png)) tool.

1. Click the **Record** (![Record icon](./extension-images/record-icon.png)) button.

1. Reload the page.

1. Change the camera model filter.  For example, at the top of the demo page, in the **Camera** dropdown menu, change from **All** to **Apple iPhone 12**.

1. Click a photo, such as the first photo.

   The photo expands.

1. In DevTools, click the **Stop** button.

   The profile is displayed.

1. Expand the **Custom performance timings — Custom track** track group.

   The following custom tracks are shown:
   * **Photo creation**
   * **Filtering**
   * **Loading**

1. Expand each of these three tracks to see the custom performance measures:

>    ![Expanded custom tracks](./extension-images/expanded-custom-tracks.png)

Author: show localhost instead of github.io, in Address Bar?

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Code examples
<!-- https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/performance/extension#code_examples -->

Below are a few examples of how to use the API to add your own data to the **Performance** tool using each available mechanism.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### `console.timeStamp` API examples
<!-- https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/performance/extension#consoletimestamp_api_examples -->

```javascript
// Take a start timestamp
const start = performance.now();

// Measure duration from start to now
console.timeStamp("measure 1", start, undefined, "My Track", "My Group", "primary-light");

// Take an end timestamp
const end = performance.now();

// Measure duration from start to end
console.timeStamp("measure 2", start, end, "My Track", "My Group", "secondary-dark");
```

This results in the following custom track entry in the performance timeline:

> ![A custom track with custom entries added with the console.timeStamp API](./extension-images/custom-track-console-timestamp.png)<!-- todo: png -->

Author: For maintainers, and also users, can we give steps to produce the screenshot on your own machine?  This upstream section lacks any hints about how they got from the code to the screenshot - mysterious gap for maintainers (& users).
@captainbrosset

> ![A custom track with custom entries added with the console.timeStamp API](./extension-images/custom-track-console-timestamp.png)<!-- todo: png -->

Author: added sufficient steps to indicate how to get from code to screenshots.

```

* `label`:

   The label for the timing entry.

* `start` (optional):

   * If defined as string: the name of a previously recorded timestamp (using `console.timeStamp(timeStampName)`).

   * If defined as number: a timestamp in milliseconds relative to [Performance.timeOrigin](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Performance/timeOrigin) (for example, taken with [performance.now()](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Performance/now)) that represents the start time of the timing entry.

   * If undefined, the current time is used as start time.

* `end`:

   * If defined as string: The name of a previously recorded timestamp.

   * If defined as number: a timestamp in milliseconds relative to [Performance.timeOrigin](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Performance/timeOrigin) (for example, taken with [performance.now()](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Performance/now)) that represents the end time of the timing entry.

   * If undefined, the current time is used as end time.

* `trackName`:

   * The name of the custom track.

* `trackGroup`:

   * The name of the track group.

* `color`:

   * The color of the entry.

See also:

> * [console: timeStamp() static method](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/console/timeStamp_static)<!-- todo: better link? only lists 1 param, not 6 -->

Author: Is there a `console.timeStamp()` Ref link that lists 6 params (custom for DevTools) instead of just 1 param?
https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/console/timeStamp_static
@captainbrosset

```javascript
type DevToolsColor =
  "primary" | "primary-light" | "primary-dark" |
  "secondary" | "secondary-light" | "secondary-dark" |
  "tertiary" | "tertiary-light" | "tertiary-dark" |
  "error";

interface ExtensionTrackEntryPayload {
  dataType?: "track-entry"; // Defaults to "track-entry"
  color?: DevToolsColor;    // Defaults to "primary"
  track: string;            // Required: Name of the custom track
  trackGroup?: string;      // Optional: Group for organizing tracks
  properties?: [string, string][]; // Key-value pairs for detailed view
  tooltipText?: string;     // Short description for tooltip
}

interface ExtensionMarkerPayload {
  dataType: "marker";       // Required: Identifies as a marker
  color?: DevToolsColor;    // Defaults to "primary"
  properties?: [string, string][]; // Key-value pairs for detailed view
  tooltipText?: string;     // Short description for tooltip
}
```

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## View your data in the timeline
<!-- https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/performance/extension#view-custom-data -->
<!-- how to view a custom track, not how to create it -->

> To see the custom performance measures in the demo:

Author: ```
To see your custom data in a recorded performance profile, in the **Performance** tool, first 
use one of the performance extensibility APIs, and then record a profile.  The [Photo Gallery 
demo page](https://microsoftedge.github.io/Demos/photo-gallery/) already uses the 
performance extensibility APIs, as demonstrated and then explained below.

To record a profile and view the custom performance data of the Photo Gallery demo page:
```

   In the **Summary** tab at the bottom of the **Performance** tool, details are shown for the marker.

The code that defines these custom performance measures is shown in [Add custom tracks and entries to the timeline (`performance.measure()`)](#add-custom-tracks-and-entries-to-the-timeline-performancemeasure), below.

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Code examples
<!-- https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/performance/extension#code_examples -->

Below are a few examples of how to use the API to add your own data to the **Performance** tool by using each available mechanism.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### `console.timeStamp` API examples
<!-- https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/performance/extension#consoletimestamp_api_examples -->

To add `console.timeStamp` to the Photo Gallery demo:

1. Clone the Demos repo and start the localhost server as described in [View your data in the timeline](#view-your-data-in-the-timeline), above.

1. In `\Demos\photo-gallery\gallery.js`, in the top of the `loadPhoto()` method, add the following code:

   ```javascript

>    // Take a start timestamp
>    const start = performance.now();
>    // Measure duration from start to now
>    console.timeStamp("measure 1", start, undefined, "My Track", "My Group", "primary-light");
>    // Take an end timestamp
>    const end = performance.now();
>    // Measure duration from start to end
>    console.timeStamp("measure 2", start, end, "My Track", "My Group", "secondary-dark");

Reviewer: This isn't a realistic example. Virtually no time will have been spent between start and end.
I think we should either find a way to put these lines in multiple different places of the demo, such that there's actual work that happens between them. Or, we just change the comments here to something like this:

```suggestion
   // Record the start timestamp of some task.
   const start = performance.now();

   // Later, once the task has been done, record the end timestamp by using console.timeStamp.
   // Because the end timestamp is undefined, the value of performance.now() will be used.
   console.timeStamp("measure 1", start, undefined, "My Track", "My Group", "primary-light");

   // Alternatively, you can provide an end timestamp.
   const end = performance.now();
   console.timeStamp("measure 2", start, end, "My Track", "My Group", "secondary-dark");
```

   ![The Photo creation custom track](./extension-images/custom-track.png)

   The events that are created by `performance.measure()` have a duration, but they are quite fast, so you must zoom in to see them in the profile.  Each of these events record the creation of an image, which happens when you change the filter (dropdown list) value, and when the whole gallery UI is refreshed.

   The **Photo creation** events appear between the `Start filtering` and `Done filtering` performance marks that result from `performance.mark()` (covered in the next section):

   ![The Start filtering mark and the Done filtering mark](./extension-images/marks-start-filtering-done-filtering.png)

See also:
* [performance.measure()](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Performance/measure)
* [performance.now()](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Performance/now)

<!-- ---------- -->
###### Add markers to the Timings track (`performance.mark()`)
<!-- https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/performance/extension#markers -->

Visually highlight specific points of interest in the timeline with custom markers that span across all tracks.

> For example, in [photo-gallery/gallery.js](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/Demos/blob/main/photo-gallery/gallery.js), an event listener handles `select` events on the demo page's `.filter` dropdown lists.  The event listener calls `performance.mark()` for the `Start filtering` event<!-- todo: correct use of "event"? --> and for the `Done filtering` event:<!-- todo: correct use of "event"? -->

Author: correct use of "event" at end of sentence 2x?
@captainbrosset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, in [photo-gallery/gallery.js](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/Demos/blob/main/photo-gallery/gallery.js), an event listener handles `input` events on the demo page's filter dropdown lists.  The event listener calls `performance.mark()` before the new filter is applied and then again once the filter has been applied.
```
